docs: add beneficial ownership reference and worked example (#1305)
open-contracting/standard: docs/guidance/map/beneficial_ownership.md

# Beneficial ownership information

This worked example describes how to:
*   publish separate contracting and beneficial ownership datasets
*   publish beneficial ownership data in OCDS

> The Beneficial Ownership Data Standard (BODS) [defines](http://standard.openownership.org/en/0.2.0/primer/whatisbo.html) “beneficial ownership” as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Beneficial Ownership Data Standard (BODS) [defines](https://standard.openownership.org/en/0.2.0/primer/whatisbo.html) “beneficial ownership” as:
```

> The right to some share of a legal entity’s income or assets (ownership) or the right to direct or influence the entity’s activities (control).

Publishing the beneficial owners of tenderers and suppliers can help users to:

*   Identify collusion or deception
*   Detect undeclared conflicts of interest
*   Identify companies with debarred or sanctioned owners
*   Assess risk

> For more information on the uses of beneficial ownership data in the context of procurement, see [Connecting the dots between beneficial ownership and procurement data](https://medium.com/opendatacoop/connecting-the-dots-between-beneficial-ownership-and-procurement-data-improving-processes-and-2fd0df9d9653). 

Reviewer: Isn't this document much more relevant? https://www.openownership.org/uploads/OO%20BO%20Data%20in%20Procurement.pdf

Author: I guess so, @duncandewhurst what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Yes! I wasn't aware of it.

> OCDS encourages the publication of company names, identifiers, and addresses. But, the core OCDS schema doesn’t cover beneficial ownership data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCDS encourages the publication of company names, identifiers, and addresses. But, the OCDS schema doesn’t cover beneficial ownership data.
```

> Some procurement systems collect beneficial ownership data, usually when companies submit bids. This data is true at the time of collection. But, procurement systems don’t track later changes to the ownership and control of suppliers. This limitation is especially challenging for users interested in longstanding contracts, in which there may have been many changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some procurement systems collect beneficial ownership data, usually when companies submit bids. This data is true at the time of collection. But, procurement systems don’t track later changes to the ownership and control of suppliers. This limitation is especially challenging for users interested in long-standing contracts, in which there may have been many changes.
```

Therefore, the preferred approach is to **publish separate contracting and beneficial ownership datasets**:

*   Publish contracting data using OCDS.

> *   Collect beneficial ownership data in a separate beneficial ownership register

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Collect beneficial ownership data in a separate beneficial ownership register.
```

*   Periodically confirm the accuracy of data in the register and record changes as they happen.
*   Publish beneficial ownership data using BODS, including a history of changes.

> So that users can connect contracting data and beneficial ownership data, you should use the same [organization identifiers](https://standard.open-contracting.org/latest/en/schema/identifiers/#organization-ids) in both datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow users to connect contracting data and beneficial ownership data, you should use the same [organization identifiers](https://standard.open-contracting.org/latest/en/schema/identifiers/#organization-ids) in both datasets.
```

Alternatively, you can **publish beneficial ownership data in OCDS** using the [beneficial owners extension](https://extensions.open-contracting.org/en/extensions/beneficialOwners/master/) if:

*   You cannot implement a separate beneficial ownership register; or

> *   You collect data in both a beneficial ownership register and a procurement system **and** the threshold for disclosure in the procurement system is lower than in the beneficial ownership register.

Reviewer: Typically, a register only covers one jurisdiction. It makes sense to collect in the procurement system to be able to have BO data for companies incorporated outside that jurisdiction.

For example, Canada will be creating a BO register for federally-registered corporations. This doesn't cover provincially-registered corporations or international corporations. So, it's still useful to collect data via the procurement system.

Author: Hmm, that is kind of covered by the first bullet, but we could add a third bullet e.g. "The existing beneficial ownership register doesn't cover all the existing companies that may participate in a contracting process."

Reviewer: I think the guidance is a little too single-country ("you") focused, and it doesn't recognize that in practice there will be multiple BO registers that can be referenced.

OCDS data can use common identifiers with BO registers regardless of whether "you" implement the relevant register. For example, if UK and France have registers but Spain does not, then the UK can use identifiers for British and French suppliers, and use the extension for Spanish suppliers. In this example, the UK ("you") can never implement a BO register for Spanish suppliers – it's impossible.

In practice, very few countries have BO registers. For the foreseeable future, It will *always* be the case that a supplier can participate from a jurisdiction without a register. As such, it always makes sense to use the extension to cover such cases.

Author: True, so, what if we change "_Alternatively, you can_..." for "_However, you can also_...", and "_if_: " for "_especially if_", and add the third bullet "_The existing beneficial ownership register doesn't cover all the existing companies that may participate in a contracting process. This may include foreign suppliers that may not be in the local company register_"

Reviewer: Thanks - done!

```{jsoninclude} ../../examples/beneficial_ownership/award.json
:jsonpointer:
:expand: releases, parties, identifier, awards, suppliers
:title: award
```

### Beneficial ownership data

The UK also publishes a separate beneficial ownership dataset: the [People with significant control (PSC) snapshot](http://download.companieshouse.gov.uk/en_pscdata.html). This dataset is updated daily and includes a history of changes. The OpenOwnership Register publishes [the PSC snapshot in BODS format](https://register.openownership.org/data_sources/uk-psc-register).

This example shows the beneficial ownership data for the supplier from the contract award: T.M. ENGINEERS (MIDLANDS) LIMITED. 

BODS is based on statements, where each statement describes ownership or control, entities, or natural persons. For more information, see the [BODS documentation](http://standard.openownership.org/). The example includes:

*   An entity statement that describes the company and includes the company number: 00507062. This is the same organization identifier used in the OCDS data.

> *   An OwnershipOrControl statement that describes the relationship between an interested party and the company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   An ownership/control statement that describes the relationship between an interested party and the company.
```

```

```{jsoninclude} ../../examples/beneficial_ownership/beneficial_ownership_statement_person.json
:jsonpointer:
:expand: names, nationalities, birthDate, addresses
:title: beneficial_ownership_statement_person
```

## Publish beneficial ownership data in OCDS

Moldova [collects the name and nationality](https://tender.gov.md/ro/content/formularul-standard-al-documentului-unic-de-achizi%C8%9Bii-european?fbclid=IwAR14CSxh6bo45cTq-hzVbwhnEkk9OEkY1aF86j1hVIU8kTnvaW3cU4q5loc) of the beneficial owners of bidders in its procurement system. But, Moldova does not maintain a separate beneficial ownership register.

Therefore, Moldova can use the beneficial owners extension to publish the data in OCDS. For more information on using the beneficial ownership extension, see the [extension documentation](https://extensions.open-contracting.org/en/extensions/beneficialOwners/master/).

This example shows a fictional contract award to Microsoft Moldova:

*   In the package metadata, the `extensions` array includes the beneficial owners extension.
*   In the `parties` array:
    *   `beneficialOwners.name` is set to the name of the beneficial owner

>     *   `beneficialOwners.nationality` is set to the ISO 2-digit country code for the nationality of the beneficial owner

Reviewer: Letters (A-Z) are not digits (0-9)...

```suggestion
    *   `beneficialOwners.nationality` is set to the country code for the nationality of the beneficial owner
```
